---------Job_id 798, Position 1---------

 
 
 
 Director - Emerging Technology - King of Prussia, PA 19406 - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in Sign in Employers / Post Job Start of main content   
 
 
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search Director - Emerging Technology Vertex, Inc. 68 reviews King of Prussia, PA 19406 Remote Full-time Vertex, Inc. 68 reviews Read what people are saying about working here. Job details Job Type Full-time Full Job Description Basic Information
 Name:  Director - Emerging Technology
 Job ID:  1397
 Posting Locations:  King of Prussia, PA, Remote
 Job Type:  full-time
 Status:  Regular
 Category:  Director
 Description and Requirements
 JOB SUMMARY: 
This position is responsible for leading the Emerging Technology team, focusing on technology-driven innovation and exploring the art of the possible. This position will foster a culture of fail fast, learn, improve, and iterate quickly. He or she will be responsible for working with innovative technology that can be leveraged to create solutions and value that Vertex’s clients and the market need. The role will be responsible for leading a team through research and pilots to advance the emerging technology agenda. Emerging technologies will be explored as they relate to business drivers whether as part of market solutions or new product ideas being explored through incubation or partnership. This leader will work closely with leaders in Product Management, IT, Strategy, and Commercial Software and Technology organizations as well as with leaders accountable for incubation and innovation of new products at Vertex. 
ESSENTIAL JOB FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES: 
Lead the functions of scanning, tracking and ranking of key technologies for Vertex’s solutions and their current and potential future impacts to Vertex. 
Lead pilots that make use of emerging technologies and demonstrate the impact on business strategy and highlight the innovation outcomes through rapid execution of projects demonstrating feasibility of achieving key business strategic goals. 
Strategically collaborate and leverage cross-functional teams to identify new opportunities to inform build, test and iterate with cutting edge technology and capabilities that drive product differentiation with a high frequency, fail fast and learn approach. 
Identify, develop, influence, and/or make the case for operationalization of emerging technologies that will enhance customer and partner experience, deliver operational efficiencies, enable differentiate value in the market, and enable next generation product offerings 
Connect technologies to business problems and educate/evangelize the application of technologies that address business problems in a way that both technical and non-technical stakeholders understand; working with and in collaboration with other senior leaders (both technical and non-technical) in both current in market solutions and emerging/new product solutions. 
Provide hands-on, operational leadership and inspiration and develop a team of passionate Page 2 of 3 technologists to drive for value creation quickly; infuse an innovation driven mindset 
Coach, develop and inspire our next generation of emerging technology and innovation leadership. • May lead projects and performs other duties as assigned. 
SUPERVISORY RESPONSIBILITIES: 
 
Determine appropriate resourcing of staff in order to achieve goals and objectives. 
Build an effective leadership team through mentoring, coaching, and education that focuses on management, performance, career development and change management. 
Define annual Key Performance Indicators aligned with corporate goals. 
Accountable for collective results and recognizing others’ contributions driving to successful outcomes. 
Own attainment of high employee satisfaction and retention; lead development of program and initiatives within group to attain high employee satisfaction. 
Lead change management initiatives to drive improvements and efficiencies. 
Ability to interact collaboratively and communicate effectively with external, internal customers, and stakeholders to address issues and ensure alignment. 
Prepare and manage budget as assigned; analyzes variances and initiates corrective actions to maximize operational performance. 
KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS AND ABILITIES: 
Experience with emerging technology team leadership with a proven track record of using emerging technologies to address product and market differentiation, build out business cases, and drive research/tracking and pilots towards measurable outcomes. 
Ability to apply multidisciplinary knowledge and practices to achieve successful outcomes in cross functional projects and activities 
Strong verbal and written communications skills are a must, strong presentation skills as well as the ability to work effectively across internal and external organizations • Strong software engineering/architecture fundamentals 
Strong analytical and problem-solving skills, with proven ability to conceptualize and design pragmatic solutions • Demonstrated experience of partnership with industry leading technology companies and start-ups • Knowledge of current technologies such as AI, data analytics, no-code/low-code, and cloud computing. 
EDUCATION AND TRAINING: 
Bachelor's Degree in Computer Science or related field required; Master of Science in Computer Science or related preferred. 
12+ years experience in technology-focused organizations. Page 3 of 3 
10+ years of leading cross-disciplinary product and engineering teams. 
5+ years of software architecture experience. 
Or equivalent combination of education and/or experience. 
Other Qualifications 
The Winning Way behaviors that all Vertex employees need in order to meet the expectations of each other, our customers, and our partners. 
Communicate with Clarity - Be clear, concise and actionable. Be relentlessly constructive. Seek and provide meaningful feedback. 
Act with Urgency - Adopt an agile mentality - frequent iterations, improved speed, resilience. 80/20 rule – better is the enemy of done. Don’t spend hours when minutes are enough. 
Work with Purpose - Exhibit a “We Can” mindset. Results outweigh effort. Everyone understands how their role contributes. Set aside personal objectives for team results. 
Drive to Decision - Cut the swirl with defined deadlines and decision points. Be clear on individual accountability and decision authority. Guided by a commitment to and accountability for customer outcomes. 
Own the Outcome - Defined milestones, commitments and intended results. Assess your work in context, if you’re unsure, ask. Demonstrate unwavering support for decisions. 
COMMENTS : The above statements are intended to describe the general nature and level of work being performed by individuals in this position. Other functions may be assigned, and management retains the right to add or change the duties at any time. 
 Vertex is an Affirmative Action and Equal Opportunity Employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, or protected veteran status and will not be discriminated against on the basis of disability. If you'd like to view a copy of the company's affirmative action plan, please email AskHR@vertexinc.com. If you are an individual with a disability and would like to request a reasonable accommodation as part of the employment selection process, please contact  610-640-4200  or AskHR@vertexinc.com. This telephone line and email address is reserved solely for job seekers with disabilities requesting accessibility assistance or an accommodation in the job application process. Please do not call about the status of your job application if you do not require accessibility assistance or an accommodation. Messages left for other purposes, such as following up on an application or non-disability related technical issues, will not receive a response. Vertex, Inc. 1 day ago original job Report job You must create an Indeed account before continuing to the company website to apply Apply Now Apply On Company Site Save this job Save this job Director of Technology jobs in King of Prussia, PA Jobs at Vertex in King of Prussia, PA Director of Technology salaries in King of Prussia, PA Company Info Follow Get job updates from Vertex, Inc. Vertex, Inc. 68 reviews Define Your Potential.



Vertex Inc. is a leading tax technology provider that connects great people and partners to deliver the world’s... Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume 
 
 Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



---------Job_id 2204, Position 2---------

 
 
 
 PVD Sr. Technologist - Albuquerque, NM 87114 - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in Employers / Post Job Skip to main content Indeed Home Sign in Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Employers Create your resume Change country 🇺🇸 United States Help Center Start of main content 
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search PVD Sr. Technologist Intel 5,442 reviews Albuquerque, NM 87114 Intel 5,442 reviews Read what people are saying about working here. Job Company Job details Job Type Full-time Full Job Description Job Description 
Intel is a company of bold and curious inventors and problem solvers who create some of the most astounding technology advancements and experiences in the world. With a legacy of relentless innovation and a commitment to bring smart, connected devices to every person on Earth, our diverse and brilliant teams are continually searching for tomorrow's technology and revel in the challenge that changing the world for the better brings. 
Intel's Optane Technology is a new breakthrough in nonvolatile memory technology and is revolutionizing the NVM landscape. Intel's unique Optane memory technology delivers industry leading low latency in both solid-state drive and persistent memory products, that are positioned to change how data is managed worldwide. You can learn more about Intel Optane here: https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/architecture-and-technology/optane-memory.html 
At Intel, we optimize storage and memory from device physics to platform architecture to system level solutions while collaborating with industry leaders to help our customers. Located at F11x in Rio Rancho, the Intel Optane Group (IOG) process development team is focused on delivering world class low latency Optane (3DxP) memory technology solutions. 
We are looking for a highly motivated Senior PVD Process Development Engineer to drive new thin solutions for this leading-edge technology. 
Your responsibilities would include: 
Investigation of new materials systems and materials or process improvements to enable continuous improvement of Optane memory cell performance. 
Developing, maintaining, and transferring new PVD processes to high volume manufacturing (HVM). 
Conducting well designed experiments and characterization to deliver world class process solutions. 
Full ownership of process setup, control, and improvements during the development phase. 
Working with other team members and equipment vendors as needed to identify- and implement new hardware solutions as needed to improve process capabilities. 
Collaboration with other process areas, integration, quality, and cost teams to deliver low cost, high margin processes to HVM. 
Ensuring that all processes and procedures conform to Intel's Safety, Environmental and Quality standards and addressing any quality deviations. 
Documentation of process work including thorough characterization of films and properties and updating process specifications as needed. 
Helping to define PVD process road maps to meet requirements, goals and milestones for new technology processes. 
Working with other IOG engineers and groups to develop, prioritize, and manage projects 
Supporting the Pilot Development team to ensure that we deliver low cost, high quality, manufacturable process solutions. 
Identifying, quantifying, and qualifying cost reduction projects 
The ideal candidate will have the following knowledge and skills: 
Will be a strategic thinker with excellent communication and collaboration skills. 
Proven experience in multi-tasking complex projects with a track record of innovation and successful delivery of processes to volume manufacturing. 
A strong grasp of thin film deposition, properties, and characterization and a fundamental understanding of how process conditions impact material properties will be needed to be successful in this role. 
Qualifications 
You must possess the below education and minimum qualifications to be initially considered for this position. Preferred qualifications are in addition to the minimum requirements and are considered a plus factor in identifying top candidates. 
Education: 
A PhD degree in Electrical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Material Science, Physics, or Chemistry. 
Minimum qualifications: 
10+ years industry experience in: 
PVD with a strong industry Research and Development background 
Experience pathfinding new materials 
Preferred qualifications: 
Advanced memory cell material development experience. 
Inside this Business Group 
The Data Center Group (DCG) is at the heart of Intel’s transformation from a PC company to a company that runs the cloud and billions of smart, connected computing devices. The data center is the underpinning for every data-driven service, from artificial intelligence to 5G to high-performance computing, and DCG delivers the products and technologies—spanning software, processors, storage, I/O, and networking solutions—that fuel cloud, communications, enterprise, and government data centers around the world. 
Posting Statement 
 
All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, religious creed, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, physical or mental disability, medical condition, genetic information, military and veteran status, marital status, pregnancy, gender, gender expression, gender identity, sexual orientation, or any other characteristic protected by local law, regulation, or ordinance. Intel 7 days ago original job Report job Apply Now Apply On Company Site Save this job Save this job Senior Technologist jobs in Albuquerque, NM Jobs at Intel in Albuquerque, NM Senior Technologist salaries in Albuquerque, NM Company Info Follow Get job updates from Intel Intel 5,442 reviews Intel put the Silicon in Silicon Valley, and today our technology remains at the core of the most exciting, life-changing innovations on ... Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



---------Job_id 3361, Position 3---------

 
 
 
 VP Clinical Development MD Oncology - Remote (3-4 days/month New Haven, CT) - New Haven, CT 06511 - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in Employers / Post Job Skip to main content Indeed Home Sign in Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Employers Create your resume Change country 🇺🇸 United States Help Center Start of main content   
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search VP Clinical Development MD Oncology - Remote (3-4 days/month New Haven, CT) BioXcel Therapeutics New Haven, CT 06511 Remote Job details Job Type Full-time Full Job Description VP Clinical Development MD Oncology
 (will work on-site in New Haven, CT 3 - 4 days/month) 
 
Responsibilities: Lead the development and the execution of oncology clinical studies Aid in identification of new targets in addition to advancing projects in the current pipeline Drive quality and speed to meet company goals Work closely with a cross-functional group of experts in commercialization, regulatory affairs, statistics, and manufacturing to manage clinical development projects Develop clinical development strategies for investigational or marketed Oncology drugs Plan clinical trials (design, operational plans, settings) based on these clinical development strategies Monitor and manage the conduct of ongoing or new clinical trials for investigational or marketed Oncology drugs Analyze and summarize the clinical findings from studies to support decisions regarding safety and efficacy as well as new drug applications, clinical study reports, or publications Act as medical monitor where required and oversee clinical safety Reports directly to the Chief Medical Officer 
 Position will be filled at level commensurate with experience. 
 
Requirements: MD or MD/PhD, with board certification in oncology preferred 10+ years’ pharma/biotech industry experience preferred Immuno oncology experience preferred Experience leading drug discovery project teams from lead optimization to IND-enabling studies is a plus: nice to have only Fluent in English Excellent communication and coordination skills. Value importance of teamwork Good understanding, good working and proactive attitude Information-gathering skills Good sense of responsibility, dedicated, honest and self-discipline Self-starter and able to anticipate potential problems and develop a mitigation plan Flexible work arrangements may be possible 
Your Path to Endless Opportunities 
If you’re looking to push the envelope and join an innovative company where technology meets drug discovery and development and you’re enthusiastic, creative, with a passion for cutting-edge research, you should join our team! We are looking for highly motivated, passionate employees to help us drive technology solutions for discovering breakthrough treatments for our portfolio of oncology and neuroscience programs, as well as for our partners across major therapeutic areas. 
About BioXcel Therapeutics, Inc . 
BioXcel Therapeutics, Inc. is a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company focused on drug development that utilizes artificial intelligence to identify improved therapies in neuroscience and immuno-oncology. BTI's drug re-innovation approach leverages existing approved drugs and/or clinically evaluated product candidates together with big data and proprietary machine learning algorithms to identify new therapeutic indices. BTI's two most advanced clinical development programs are BXCL501, an investigational sublingual thin film formulation in development for acute treatment of agitation resulting from neuropsychiatric disorders, and BXCL701, an investigational orally administered systemic innate immunity activator in development for treatment of a rare form of prostate cancer and for treatment of pancreatic cancer in combination with other immuno-oncology agents. For more information, please visit www.bioxceltherapeutics.com. BioXcel Therapeutics 27 days ago original job Report job Apply Now Apply On Company Site Save this job Save this job Vice President of Business Development jobs in New Haven, CT Jobs at BioXcel Therapeutics in New Haven, CT Vice President of Business Development salaries in New Haven, CT Company Info Follow Get job updates from BioXcel Therapeutics  



Your Path to Endless Opportunities



If you’re looking to push the envelope and join an innovative company where technology meets d... Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



---------Job_id 1545, Position 4---------

 
 
 
 Digital Design Returnship - Chandler, AZ 85226 - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in Employers / Post Job Skip to main content Indeed Home Sign in Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Employers Create your resume Change country 🇺🇸 United States Help Center Start of main content   
 
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search Digital Design Returnship Synopsys 262 reviews Chandler, AZ 85226 Synopsys 262 reviews Read what people are saying about working here. Job details Job Type Full-time Temporary Full Job Description 30268BR 
 USA - Arizona - Chandler, USA - Arizona - Tucson, USA - California - California, USA - California - Folsom, USA - California - Irvine, USA - California - Los Angeles, USA - California - Mountain View/Sunnyvale, USA - California - Pasadena, USA - California - San Diego, USA - California - San Francisco, USA - California - San Jose, USA - Colorado - Denver, USA - Colorado - Longmont, USA - Colorado - Westminster, USA - Florida - Oviedo, USA - Georgia - Atlanta, USA - Illinois - Chicago, USA - Illinois - Schaumburg, USA - Indiana - Bloomington, USA - Indiana - Indianapolis, USA - Maryland - Columbia, USA - Massachusetts - Boston, USA - Massachusetts - Boxborough, USA - Massachusetts - Burlington, USA - Massachusetts - Marlboro, USA - Michigan - Detroit, USA - Michigan - Novi, USA - Minnesota - Bloomington, USA - Minnesota - Minneapolis, USA - Minnesota - Roseville, USA - New Jersey - Bedminster, USA - New Jersey - Newark, USA - New York - New York City, USA - New York - Ossining, USA - North Carolina - Durham, USA - Ohio - Cincinnati, USA - Ohio - Columbus, USA - Oregon - Hillsboro, USA - Pennsylvania - Allentown, USA - Tennessee - Nashville, USA - Texas - Austin, USA - Texas - Dallas, USA - Texas - Plano, USA - USA, USA - Virginia - Dulles, USA - Washington - Bellevue, USA - Washington - Seattle, USA - Washington DC, USA-Texas-Addison, USA-Texas-Addison, USA-Virginia-Herndon 
 Job Description and Requirements 
 Let us help you get back into a high paced, dynamic and collaborative work environment, where your ideas and contributions will enable innovative products and solutions. As Synopsys, you will have the opportunity to gain hands-on experience while working alongside industry professionals. You will build and refine skills relevant to your career goals. The Synopsys RIYA (Re-Ignite Your Aspiration) returnship program emphasizes re-integration, allowing you to work hand-in hand with mentors and colleagues on your team. The end goal will be to provide you with an enriching experience through exposure to our products, tools, strategies, while expanding your network, that will ultimately lead to a full-time role. This is a 4-6 month position intended for professionals who have been out of the industry for at least 2 years. 
 
Skills: 
You are encouraged to apply if you have all or some of the skills and experience listed below. 
Experience with EDA tools 
Experience with VLSI CAD Algorithms 
Basic knowledge of semiconductor IC circuits 
Programming languages such as C/C++, Python, MATLAB, CUDA 
Understanding of Machine Learning and Deep-Learning algorithms 
Expertise with RTL2GDS Design Implementation Flow and methodology 
Education Qualifications: 
BS in Electrical Engineering, Software Engineering, Computer Engineering, Computer Science or related field. 
Our Silicon Design & Verification business is all about building high-performance silicon chips—faster. We’re the world’s leading provider of solutions for designing and verifying advanced silicon chips. And we design the next-generation processes and models needed to manufacture those chips. We enable our customers to optimize chips for power, cost, and performance—eliminating months off their project schedules. 
At Synopsys, we’re at the heart of the innovations that change the way we work and play. Self-driving cars. Artificial Intelligence. The cloud. 5G. The Internet of Things. These breakthroughs are ushering in the Era of Smart Everything. And we’re powering it all with the world’s most advanced technologies for chip design and software security. If you share our passion for innovation, we want to meet you. 
 
Inclusion and Diversity are important to us. Synopsys considers all applicants for employment without regard to race, color, religion, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, military veteran status, or disability. 
 Job Category 
 Temporary
 Country 
 United States
 Job Subcategory 
 Temporary
 Hire Type 
 Employee Synopsys 30+ days ago original job Report job Apply Now Apply On Company Site Save this job Save this job Digital Designer jobs in Chandler, AZ Jobs at Synopsys in Chandler, AZ Digital Designer salaries in Chandler, AZ Company Info Follow Get job updates from Synopsys Synopsys 262 reviews Synopsys technology is at the heart of innovations that are changing the way people work and play. Self-driving cars. Machines that learn... Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume 
 Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



---------Job_id 1628, Position 5---------

 
 
 
 Multi - Service PA2 - Pensacola, FL - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in profile Sign in Employers / Post Job hamburger Start of main content   
 
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search Multi - Service PA2 Capgemini 8,255 reviews Pensacola, FL Capgemini 8,255 reviews Read what people are saying about working here. Job details Job Type Contract Full Job Description Duration :6+Months 
Responsibilities : 
Technical Support function - Should be flexible to work in different shifts. However, flexibility is preferred to work in a 24/7 environment if and when needed. 
Provide phone-based customer technical support for client devices (hardware and the accompanying software) and web-based software and desktop applications 
Provide installation assistance for customer desktop/web-based software, including database setup. 
Work with customer or their IT department to ensure readiness, installation support, and troubleshooting 
Develop training and tracking resources to streamline installation processes, workflow, triage and troubleshooting guides, and common FAQs. 
Logging and investigation of complaints, defects or other sources of customer dissatisfaction. 
Ability to be flexible in work schedules to meet/discuss with US based teams/counterparts project time zones. 
Principle shift 0500 1330 US CT 
Requirements : 
Prefer a bachelors degree from an accredited university: preferably in Computer Science, Management Information Systems or IT or equivalent degrees/certifications. 
At least 1-2 years (preferred) of combined experience with one or more of the following: software support; hardware support; Installation and Implementation setup, Customer Experience, technical documentation; and/or instructions in a private, public, government or military environment. 
Basic understanding of Computer Networking concepts, protocols, technologies, and applications. 
Basic understanding of computer system: User Account Control (UAC), Group Policy, Endpoint Security and Firewall, Remote desktop connection, Troubleshooting in Virtual Environment. 
Basic understanding or experience in Windows OS, Microsoft IIS, and SQL is preferred. 
Strong written and oral communication skills. English Language is mandatory (Read, Write and Speak) 
Resource - Spanish and English Sucessfully Read, Write and Speak in both languages 
Ability to effectively prioritize and make decisions 
Needs to be comfortable with dealing with software and pick up concepts quickly. 
Training, Installation support and scheduling experience will be a plus. 
Problem-solving skills needed. Experience of transitioning old to new systems, Implementation setup will be a plus. 
Should possess excellent communication skills, interpersonal skills, people/team management & strong leadership skills 
Excellent Communication skills, Team Player, Interpersonal skills 
Customer service and technical troubleshooting skills. 
Providing Hardware and Software Support to Customers calling over the phone/email. 
Exceeding call quality and efficiency standards. 
Adherence to Process, Policy & Procedures 
Meeting and exceeding client SL 
Maximize customer satisfaction through effective solutions delivery 
The Capgemini Freelancer Gateway is enabled by a cutting-edge software platform that leads the contingent labor world for technology innovation. The software platform leverages Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence to make sure the right people end up in the right job. 
A global leader in consulting, technology services and digital transformation, Capgemini is at the forefront of innovation to address the entire breadth of clients’ opportunities in the evolving world of cloud, digital and platforms. Building on its strong 50 year heritage and deep industry-specific expertise, Capgemini enables organizations to realize their business ambitions through an array of services from strategy to operations. Capgemini is driven by the conviction that the business value of technology comes from and through people. It is a multicultural company of over 200,000 team members in more than 40 countries. The Group reported 2018 global revenues of EUR 13.2 billion. Capgemini 8 days ago original job Report job Apply Now Apply On Company Site Save this job Save this job Jobs at Capgemini in Pensacola, FL Company Info Follow Get job updates from Capgemini Capgemini 8,255 reviews A global leader in consulting, technology services and digital transformation, Capgemini is at the forefront of innovation to address the... Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume 
 Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



---------Job_id 254, Position 6---------

 
 
 
 Frontend Engineer - Milwaukee, WI 53202 - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in profile Sign in Employers / Post Job hamburger Start of main content   
 
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search Frontend Engineer Foxconn 2,138 reviews Milwaukee, WI 53202 Foxconn 2,138 reviews Read what people are saying about working here. Job details Job Type Full-time Full Job Description Frontend Engineer 
 Foxconn Industrial Internet (Fii)  provides innovative design and advanced manufacturing capabilities through Artificial Intelligence driven solutions. Dedicated to the expansion of AI-driven platforms, Fii centers around Cloud Based Computing, Big Data, High-Speed Networks, Automation, and Industry 4.0 methodology. Join an expansive network of professionals who embody an entrepreneurial spirit that works together within a company culture of  one shared mission. 
 
Foxconn is currently seeking a  Frontend Engineer  to join our Industrial A.I. team in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. This individual will be responsible for frontend development for our iAIIinstitute.com e-learning platform, including new features, porting 3rd party solutions, maintenance, and customization. This role requires significant work experience in web interfaces, such as Vue.js, React, HTML5, CSS, and general experience consuming backend web services and third-party APIs. The Frontend engineer will work with the team to implement features and tests, debug during development and after integration, and create and maintain design documentation. 
 Responsibilities Include:
 Design, build and maintain responsive web applications. 
 Collaborating with backend engineers to drive the design of our APIs and backend services. 
 Translating designs and wireframes into high-quality code, forming intuitive user interfaces. 
 Other duties as assigned. 
 Education Requirements, Ideal Experience: 
 Bachelor's degree in Computer Science or related field. 
 Strong JavaScript skills, including modern JavaScript (es2016+). 
 Experience with Vue  required . 
 Highly proficient in CSS and HTML/HTML5. 
 Experience with Node/NodeJS/NPM/YARN  required 
 Has experience using Git 
 Experience in developing for mobile/responsive layouts. 
 Team player, with the willingness to work with distributed teams. 
 Bias for action, always pushing the task forward. 
 Excellent communication skills including the ability to explain complex technical details to someone non-technical. 
 Legal authorization to work in the US is required. We will not sponsor individuals for employment visas, now or in the future, for this job opening. 
 Preferred Skills: 
 Experience with a ticket tracker, most notably JIRA. 
 Experience in React/ReactJS, REST/RESTful/REST API 
 Experience with unit testing, most notably Jest, Mocha, and Selenium. 
 Experience with Database/SQL/NoSQL 
 Familiarity with jQuery/JSON 
 Familiarity with usability, UX/UI Design. 
 Familiarity with optimization techniques. 
 Familiarity with Typescript. 
 Experience fetching and visualizing data from external API. 
 
 
 Foxconn provides equal employment opportunities (EEO) to all employees and applicants for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, or genetics. In addition to federal law requirements, Foxconn complies with applicable state and local laws governing nondiscrimination in employment in every location in which the company has facilities. This policy applies to all terms and conditions of employment, including recruiting, hiring, placement, promotion, termination, layoff, recall, and transfer, leaves of absence, compensation, and training. 
 
XJ6 Foxconn 18 days ago original job If you require alternative methods of application or screening, you must approach the employer directly to request this as Indeed is not responsible for the employer's application process. Report job Apply Now Apply Now Save this job Save this job Front End Developer jobs in Milwaukee, WI Jobs at Foxconn in Milwaukee, WI Front End Developer salaries in Milwaukee, WI Company Info Follow Get job updates from Foxconn Foxconn 2,138 reviews Established in Taiwan in 1974, Hon Hai Technology Group (Foxconn) (2317:Taiwan) is the world’s largest electronics manufacturer. Foxconn ... Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume 
 Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



---------Job_id 1126, Position 7---------

 
 
 
 MD/ DO/ PA/ NP (full-time) - Wickenburg, AZ - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in Employers / Post Job Skip to main content Indeed Home Sign in Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Employers Create your resume Change country 🇺🇸 United States Help Center Start of main content   
 
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search MD/ DO/ PA/ NP (full-time) The Wound Pros, LLC Wickenburg, AZ Job details Job Type Full-time Full Job Description The Wound Pros is a nationwide Wound Care Medical Group. Our full-service wound care strategy has added enormous value to patients who are homebound or reside in long-term facilities across the country by providing an array of essential tools including: Digital Wound Management, Telemedicine, Advanced EHR System, Mobile Vascular Assessment, Digital Supply tracking, as well as Advanced Wound Care Dressings.
 By leveraging the power of Artificial Intelligence, we have been able to heal wounds faster and more efficiently. By joining our team, you will be able to be a part of our mission to heal wounds and prevent amputations in long-term care facilities.
 We are seeking MD/ DO/ NP/ PAs in various markets across the country to provide and manage advanced wound care to patients who are homebound patients or in long-term care facilities.
 Don't have Wound Care Experience? No worries, we will train you and help you get certified. 
 Responsibilities and Duties: 
 Perform complete physical exams of patients. Select, order, and perform tests and procedures to best treat the patient. Perform wound care procedures as deemed necessary and appropriate for plan of care in accordance to Wound Pros 6 Step Treatment Protocol. Define and document patient diagnoses. Recommendations for prescription of required medications and/or Surgical/Wound Care Dressings to facilitate wound healing and/or wound prevention. Assure all patients are completely satisfied, by exemplifying Wound Pros standards for patient care. Patient education and management Assists with special projects as needed. Debridement of wounds by various methods completed safely during the patient visit. Application of topical wound care and other wound management products Notate findings and treatment course in patient chart, including follow-up notes. Actively participate in departmental activities to improve training methods and achieve company goals. Travel to patients' homes and/or long re facilities is be required.
 Qualifications: 
 MD/DOs must be a graduate of an accredited school of Allopathic Medicine or Osteopathic Medicine. Physician's Assistants should be a graduate of an accredited Certified Physicians Assistants Program  License to practice Medicine as a MD/ DO/ NP or PA-C with a current valid state license.  Patient-centric approach Excellent verbal and written communication skills in a professional environment Must be proficient with medical instruments and equipment required by Wound Pros. Ability to communicate effectively, in verbal and written form. Sound understanding of all federal and state regulations. Ability to lift 50 lbs. or more. Must have full range of mobility. Must be able to reposition patients. Valid and unrestricted driver's license
 Why work for The Wound Pros? 
 Highly competitive compensation package You conduct the initial evaluation, and all follow up visits. You will have the full support of Wound Care Certified Nurses for consultation Comprehensive benefits package ( 100% Employee covered Medical Plan ) Health Dental Vision  Mileage Reimbursement The Wound Pros, LLC 19 days ago original job If you require alternative methods of application or screening, you must approach the employer directly to request this as Indeed is not responsible for the employer's application process. Report job Apply Now Apply Now Save this job Save this job Nurse Practitioner jobs in Wickenburg, AZ Jobs at The Wound Pros in Wickenburg, AZ Nurse Practitioner salaries in Wickenburg, AZ Company Info Follow Get job updates from The Wound Pros, LLC Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume 
 Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



---------Job_id 33, Position 8---------

 
 
 
 Frontend Software Engineer - Seattle, WA - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in Employers / Post Job Skip to main content Indeed Home Sign in Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Employers Create your resume Change country 🇺🇸 United States Help Center Start of main content 
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search Frontend Software Engineer ANDURIL INDUSTRIES Seattle, WA Anduril is a defense technology company, bringing Silicon Valley talent and funding to the defense sector. Our technology helps our customers solve their toughest challenges by enabling them to make better, more informed decisions in life-and-death situations. We’ve assembled a diverse team of experts in artificial intelligence, computer vision, sensor fusion, optics, and data analysis that are creating software and hardware solutions to radically evolve the capabilities of the United States and our allies. If you are passionate about solving problems that have real impact, come join Anduril and build the future of defense. 
We are looking for Frontend Software Engineers to join our team. As a Frontend Software Engineer at Anduril you will be architecting and building out our front end features and tooling, deploying them to users, and making sure they're meeting users' requirements. You will be working alongside a team of engineers with diverse backgrounds. 
 
 As an early member of the team, your decisions today will have a large impact on the company today and into the future. We believe that simple systems are easier to understand, maintain, and scale. You will be making trade-offs as you work to ensure that our systems are prepared to scale — being able to effectively communicate these trade-offs with your teammates is a must. 
The ideal candidate has curiosity and experience in backend systems as well so that you can understand and contribute to it in support of your frontend responsibilities. 
 What you'll do 
Design, build, and deploy a real-time, map-based interface for displaying and interacting with sensor data and commanding physical assets 
Fetch and manage large streams of data while maintaining performant rendering in a low-friction user experience 
Build and design immersive image-viewing experiences on multiple platforms, including web-based and mobile 3D image viewing as well as integrated VR experiences 
Work with technologies like: Typescript, React/Redux for web front end, React Native, Android Java and Swift for mobile applications, C++, Go, and Haskell for backend systems, Github, & Docker 
 Required qualifications 
Degree in Computer Science, Operations Research, Electrical Engineering or related technical degree 
Experience working on frontend applications, especially data-intensive or map-based systems 
Proficiency with a programming language such as Javascript, Typescript, or Java 
Ability to empathize with end-users, to turn needs into features, and to balance user experience with engineering constraints 
U.S. Person status may be required as this position needs to access export controlled data. 
 Preferred qualifications 
We encourage people from all backgrounds go apply but our tech stack uses AWS, C++, Go, Typescript, and React so familiarity with all of these tools and languages would be useful 
Previous experience working with the DoD 
Startup experience 
3D mapping experience
 Anduril is an equal-opportunity employer, and we encourage candidates from all backgrounds to apply. If you are someone passionate to work on problems that matter, we’d love to hear from you! ANDURIL INDUSTRIES 30+ days ago original job Report job Apply Now Apply On Company Site Save this job Save this job Front End Developer jobs in Seattle, WA Jobs at ANDURIL INDUSTRIES in Seattle, WA Front End Developer salaries in Seattle, WA Company Info Follow Get job updates from ANDURIL INDUSTRIES Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



---------Job_id 1465, Position 9---------

 
 
 
 Manufacturing Operator - Part-Time Schedules - Essex Junction, VT - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in Employers / Post Job Skip to main content Indeed Home Sign in Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Employers Create your resume Change country 🇺🇸 United States Help Center Start of main content 
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search Manufacturing Operator - Part-Time Schedules GLOBALFOUNDRIES 661 reviews Essex Junction, VT GLOBALFOUNDRIES 661 reviews Read what people are saying about working here. Job details Salary $15.50 an hour Job Type Part-time Full Job Description GLOBALFOUNDRIES is a leading full-service semiconductor design, development, fabrication, and innovation company with locations across the globe. We think differently, design with excellence and enable “connected intelligence” across a growing universe of devices, networks and data centers, working with some of the world’s most inspired companies to develop and produce the semiconductors that are changing the way all people live today—and defining what’s possible for tomorrow.
 If you are looking for a part-time job with a steady income and a flexible schedule, and you have what it takes to be a valued part of a manufacturing environment, we want to talk to you! We have part-time opportunities on days, nights, weekends, your choice!
 Location: Essex Junction, VT
 Night Shift Pay Rate - $17.44/hr
 Day Shift Pay Rate - $ 15.50/hr
 Schedule: 24 to 30 hours per week
 Minimum of 6.5 hours per shift required! 
 Essential Responsibilities:
 Work in a clean room environment wearing gloves and a clean room suit
 Sustain and run the manufacturing floor
 Set up and operate equipment per Standard Operating Procedures
 Work in a team environment to meet production goals
 Perform all activities in a safe and responsible manner and support all Environmental, Health, Safety & Security requirements, and programs
 Required Qualifications:
 High School Diploma or GED Equivalent
 Language Fluency - English (Written & Verbal)
 Ability to stand for extended periods of time.
 Must be comfortable wearing a clean room uniform
 Ability to comply with all GLOBALFOUNDRIES pre-employment screening requirements
 Ability to lift up to 30 pounds on a periodic basis throughout the shift
 Must have basic computer and email skills
 Must be 18 years of age or older to apply
 Preferred Qualifications:
 Demonstrated ability to receive and follow instructions
 Ability to find information in a spreadsheet or on a website
 Strong attention to detail 
 If you need a reasonable accommodation for any part of the employment process, please contact us by email at usaccommodations@globalfoundries.com and let us know the nature of your request and your contact information. Requests for accommodation will be considered on a case-by-case basis. Please note that only inquiries concerning a request for reasonable accommodation will be responded to from this email address.
 An offer of employment with GLOBALFOUNDRIES is conditioned upon the successful completion of a background check and drug screen, as applicable and subject to applicable laws and regulations.
 GLOBALFOUNDRIES is fully committed to equal opportunity in the workplace and believes that cultural diversity within the company enhances its business potential. GLOBALFOUNDRIES goal of excellence in business necessitates the attraction and retention of highly qualified people. Artificial barriers and stereotypic biases detract from this objective and may be illegally discriminatory. 
 All policies and processes which pertain to employees including recruitment, selection, training, utilization, promotion, compensation, benefits, extracurricular programs, and termination are created and implemented without regard to age, ethnicity, ancestry, color, marital status, medical condition, mental or physical disability, national origin, race, religion, political and/or third-party affiliation, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, veteran status, or any other characteristic or category specified by local, state or federal law. GLOBALFOUNDRIES 30+ days ago original job Report job Apply Now Apply On Company Site Save this job Save this job Manufacturing Operator jobs in Essex Junction, VT Jobs at GLOBALFOUNDRIES in Essex Junction, VT Manufacturing Operator salaries in Essex Junction, VT Company Info Follow Get job updates from GLOBALFOUNDRIES GLOBALFOUNDRIES 661 reviews Changing the world from the inside out. Join the team that’s moving the world forward.



What makes GF different? Our advanced operation... Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



---------Job_id 851, Position 10---------

 
 
 
 EDGE Leadership Program Engineer - Daytona Beach, FL 32114 - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in Employers / Post Job Skip to main content Indeed Home Sign in Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Employers Create your resume Change country 🇺🇸 United States Help Center Start of main content 
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search This job has expired on Indeed Reasons could include: the employer is not accepting applications, is not actively hiring, or is reviewing applications EDGE Leadership Program Engineer EnPro Industries Daytona Beach, FL 32114 Job details Job Type Full-time Full Job Description Title:  EDGE Leadership Program Engineer 
 
Position Type:  Full-Time/Regular 
 
Division:  EnPro Corporate 
 
Department:  Engineering 
 
Location:  Rotates Every Year 
 Job Summary & Job Duties 
The EnPro Education, Development & Growth for Excellence (EDGE) program is designed to attract May 2021 college graduates with a Bachelor's and/or Master's degree in Engineering (typical backgrounds include chemical, mechanical, industrial, and material science engineering). The program provides a significant level of depth and breadth of experience by providing three distinct developmental assignments across EnPro and its divisions. Each rotation lasts one year, and the locations and roles depend on our engineers' individual career interests and the business's needs. Roles are determined in the spring of each year prior to a summer rotation, so this role is great if you are flexible, a little adventurous, and enjoy change! 
 
 Engineering Rotations May Include: 
 Continuous Improvement (Lean Manufacturing) Process Product Manufacturing Applications Quality Research & Design Robotic Process Automation & Artificial Intelligence 
Objectives of the Engineering Rotations: 
 
The EDGE program is designed to help engineers gain the following experiences during their developmental assignments. Developmental assignments will be established to ensure that the participant is: 
 Given significant and increasingly challenging professional responsibilities Exposed to at least two EnPro divisions Prepared to add value in all rotations, and subsequent positions at the program's completion Required to provide written performance assessments at the end of each assignment to ensure proper growth In addition, technical coaches, mentors, and managers will be responsible for assisting in the EDGE participants' technical and leadership development during the program Exposure to Manufacturing Processes and Testing Laboratories: The EDGE program will involve working in advanced manufacturing facilities with state-of-the-art test and measurement equipment, as well as research and testing laboratories. The EDGE participant will have the chance to learn from the existing processes and modify or create new ones. Exposure to Engineering Excellence and Leadership: The EDGE rotations will provide you an opportunity to enhance your skills in multiple technical areas. These rotations will also provide exposure to EnPro's division-based operations and engineering leaders. 
The Rotational Program Focuses on the Development of a Core Set of Competencies: 
 Leadership Teamwork Innovation Cross-Functional Learning Communication Project Management Machine Automation and Control Design for Commercialization Process Analysis and Optimization Root Cause Analysis 
 
EnPro Industries companies are known for our focus on a Dual Bottom Line culture where we seek to enable the full release of human possibility through individual development while achieving strong financial returns. We invest in our employees and provide opportunities for them to make a difference while building a culture that reflects our core values of safety, excellence and respect. Each person has the opportunity to truly make an impact as an integral part of a collective. Recruiting, training, empowering and retaining exceptionally talented people enables our company to achieve exceptional performance. 
 Minimum Qualifications 
 A Bachelor's Degree in Engineering with a GPA of 3.0 or above Strong commitment to a career in technology and a passion for engineering Co-op or internship experience in engineering Successful track record of challenging engineering and related courses Strong technical knowledge, mathematics skills, and problem-solving skills Must be self-directed and able to work in a fast paced, team-oriented environment Strong analytical, organization and communication skills 
 Preferred Qualifications: 
 Involvement in extracurricular organizations, groups, or sports is preferred 
 About EnPro: 
 
EnPro Industries is a leading provider of engineered industrial products for the processing and general manufacturing industries worldwide. Headquartered in Charlotte, North Carolina, the company operates in three segments. We are a leader in sealing technologies, metal polymer and filament wound bearings, components and service for reciprocating compressors, and other solutions that meet the needs of industries worldwide. 
 
EnPro operates manufacturing facilities in North and South America, Europe and Asia; we employ approximately 4,000 people worldwide, and our products are sold to more than 50,000 customers in over 100 countries across the globe. End-users of EnPro's products include chemical and petrochemical companies, petroleum refiners, pulp and paper companies, food and pharmaceutical companies, truck and trailer manufacturers, freight lines and shipping companies, semiconductor manufacturers, utilities, and municipalities. Our commitment to innovation, quality and value has propelled our brands to wide recognition and leading positions in their markets. 
 
EnPro Industries is an equal opportunity employer. Legal authorization to work in the United States is required. Enpro Industries 30+ days ago original job Report job Engineer jobs in Daytona Beach, FL Jobs at EnPro Industries in Daytona Beach, FL Engineer salaries in Daytona Beach, FL Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



---------Job_id 366, Position 11---------

 
 
 
 Project Manager - San Jose, CA - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in Employers / Post Job Skip to main content Indeed Home Sign in Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Employers Create your resume Change country 🇺🇸 United States Help Center Start of main content 
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search This job has expired on Indeed Reasons could include: the employer is not accepting applications, is not actively hiring, or is reviewing applications Project Manager Lionbridge Technologies San Jose, CA Job details Job Type Full-time Full Job Description Lionbridge enables more than 800 world-leading brands to increase international market share, speed adoption of products and effectively engage their customers in local markets worldwide. Using our innovative cloud technology platforms and our global crowd of more than 100,000 professional cloud workers, we provide translation, digital marketing, global content management and application testing solutions that ensure global brand consistency, local relevancy and technical usability across all touch points of the customer lifecycle. Based in Waltham, Mass., Lionbridge maintains solution centers in 28 countries. 
 
Employee Sub-Group: Regular FT Salaried
 
Work Schedule:
 
Location: San Jose , California
 
Position Title: Project Manager 
 
Req: 32206
 
 
As a Project Manager, you will be responsible for the day-to-day management of one or more complex programs. You may also manage Project Coordinator(s) assisting with projects. The role requires class-leading customer engagement involving strong written and verbal communication skills, ability to empathize with and respond to customers' needs, problem-solving skills and the ability to function effectively in a fast-moving, rapidly changing environment. Collaboration with multi-location and cross-functional teams will be key to maintain and improve customer satisfaction, revenue and profitability.
 
 
 Primary Responsibilities
 
 Recognize customer needs and proactively focus on fulfilling these needs through innovative thinking and collaboration with internal technical, production, quality and management teams.
 Own and maintain project financials, including revenue recognition, revenue forecasting and customer billing.
 Collaborate with internal teams to initiate and implement procedural changes and customized workflows.
 Review customer satisfaction regularly.
 While working with our local and off-shore teams, plan and monitor projects to meet deadlines, quality and budget requirements. Focus on continuous improvements and cost saving measures.
 Optimization through automation - provide innovative solutions to improve processes. 
 
 
 Minimum Requirements
 
 3 - 5 years of experience a Project Manager, ideally in Machine Learning or similar environment/domain.
 Experience in crowd or data collection projects involving text, speech, image or video, is an advantage.
 General knowledge of artificial intelligence and machine learning is an advantage
 Experience in managing global projects with an extended complexity.
 Technical proficiency (including spreadsheets, Office tools, Google Suite).
 Fluency in English is a must.
 Experience in financial management and budgeting.
 Experience in managing small teams.
 Problem solving skills.
 Innovative approach.
 Ability to optimize tasks and processes.
 Proactivity. 
 
 
All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability or protected veteran status. Lionbridge Technologies 2 days ago original job Report job Project Manager jobs in San Jose, CA Jobs at Lionbridge Technologies in San Jose, CA Project Manager salaries in San Jose, CA Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



---------Job_id 2223, Position 12---------

 
 
 
 Linux Support Engineer - Remote - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in Employers / Post Job Skip to main content Indeed Home Sign in Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Employers Create your resume Change country 🇺🇸 United States Help Center Start of main content   
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search Linux Support Engineer Lambda 17 reviews Remote Remote Lambda 17 reviews Read what people are saying about working here. Location: Remote role, open to candidates in the US. Must be willing to travel. 
 
Lambda's mission is to accelerate human progress with computation. Our Deep Learning workstations, servers, and cloud services power ML engineers at the forefront of AI research, fueling advancements in quantum computing, cancer detection, autonomous aircraft, drug discovery, self driving cars, and much more. 
 
Lambda provides Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning infrastructure to organizations like Apple, Intel, Microsoft, Amazon Research, Tencent, Kaiser Permanente, MIT, Harvard, Stanford, Caltech and the Department of Defense. 
 
 About the Role 
 
Lambda is growing! Come work at a profitable startup where we’re building powerful research computers and software for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence experts around the world. 
 
We’re looking for a Linux technical support engineer who wants to help provide our customers with world class UNIX / Linux support for their GPU servers, workstations, laptops, and cloud instances. 
 
What You’ll Do 
 Be first point of contact for all incoming technical support questions (phone, email, chat, and forum) 
 Troubleshoot software and hardware issues for customers 
 Document solutions to common problems 
 About You 
 
We’re looking for someone who is inherently hands-on, yet has the know-how and would be ready to take the next step forward in their career at a startup, drive change and build for growth in order to help scale the company. This role is a great way to gain experience and understanding in how to run an enterprise level hardware / software cluster, which is a great stepping stone into future opportunities. We’re looking for those who want a front row seat to the ML space. You won't be supporting run of the mill tech, you'll be exposed to ML frameworks and working with on the edge companies. 
 
Experience We’re Looking For 
 Linux administration experience, either hobbyist or professional. 
 Shell and Python scripting proficiency. 
 Excellent written and oral communication skills. 
 
 Nice to Have 
 
 Familiarity with ML / AI / Deep Learning. 
 
 Quick Company Highlights 
 
 Our research papers have been accepted into the top machine learning and graphics conferences, including ICCV, SIGGRAPH Asia, NeurIPS, and ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG). 
 We are profitable and have tripled in growth since founding the company. 
 We’re backed by investors including Gradient Ventures, Google’s AI-focused venture fund. 
 Lambda operates as a remote workforce based on role. We produce hardware in our SF location and also have employees located remotely across the US. 
 We offer generous cash & equity compensation 
 We provide employer sponsored benefits including health, dental, and vision coverage for you and your dependents 
 401k Plan 
 3 weeks Annual Paid Time Off 
 
 Equal Opportunity Employer 
 
Lambda Labs is an Equal Opportunity employer. Applicants are considered without regard to race, color, religion, creed, national origin, age, sex, gender, marital status, sexual orientation and identity, genetic information, veteran status, citizenship, or any other factors prohibited by local, state, or federal law. Lambda 30+ days ago original job Report job Apply Now Apply On Company Site Save this job Save this job Linux Engineer jobs in Remote Jobs at Lambda in Remote Linux Engineer salaries in Remote Company Info Follow Get job updates from Lambda Lambda 17 reviews Lambda is the official English student newspaper at Laurentian University in Sudbury, Ontario, Canada. Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



---------Job_id 1296, Position 13---------

 
 
 
 Project Controls Specialist - Boston, MA 02111 - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in Employers / Post Job Skip to main content Indeed Home Sign in Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Employers Create your resume Change country 🇺🇸 United States Help Center Start of main content 
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search Project Controls Specialist STV 151 reviews Boston, MA 02111 STV 151 reviews Read what people are saying about working here. Job details Job Type Full-time Full Job Description STV is a leading, award-winning professional firm offering engineering, architectural, planning, environmental and construction management services. We consistently rank among the country's top 25 firms in education, corrections, highways, bridges, rail and mass transit. Throughout the United States and in Canada, STV’s professional, technical and support personnel offer services to a broad and ever-expanding client base. We provide planning, environmental, design, program and construction management, and specialty services for the healthcare, transportation, design-build, institutional and commercial building, advanced technology, industrial and defense markets. 
We have an opportunity for a  Project Controls Specialist  for our Project Controls Group in Newton, MA. As a Project Controls Specialist, you will be a member of our Nationwide Project Controls Group supporting some of the most exciting and icon projects and programs. Our Project Controls Group provides services in the areas of Cost Engineering, Scheduling, Estimating, Document Control, Risk Management. In addition, our team also encompasses a Project Technology Group which delivers value to our clients through leveraging leading-edge technologies throughout the project and program lifecycles and drives value to our end clients through the use of machine learning and artificial intelligence. 
The Project Controls Specialist will be responsible for management and performance of a team in all estimating, scheduling and project controls functions for building construction, healthcare, transportation and infrastructure projects including change order analysis and negotiation; constructability reviews of project plans and specifications (both in progress and completed designs), risk management and value engineering. The Project Controls Specialist will ensure the effective review of construction design drawings & specifications, supervises office and/or field teams to ensure the team gathers all material and data necessary to organize the required activities and produce final documentation for review by management before issuance to the client. 
Responsible for the identification and evaluation of potential opportunities, presenting data and developing the summary effect of initiatives to STV management an clients as required. Will have a demonstrated ability to manage a team of staff, of various disciplines, to accurately and efficiently complete deliverables and meet deadlines. Will report monthly on progress to the project controls director and project executive. Will identify potential opportunities for the expansion of the STV team and engage with the client to secure additional positions when available. 
The Project Controls Specialist will need to able to work in STV offices and project sites in the Boston, MA metropolitan area. Occasional or in-frequent travel may be required to other cities. 
Required Skills: 
Must have a minimum of 5 years of experience with the project cost management and earned value performance measurement. 
The ideal candidate must have a Bachelor’s degree in Construction Management, Business, Architecture, Engineering or a related field from an accredited College or University. 
Experience with Healthcare projects is preferred but not required. 
Experience with Microsoft Office Suite, PMWeb, BIM, and Primavera P6 is desired. 
Anticipated Project Controls Duties include the following: 
Assist Project Controls Manager with cost control, cost reporting, scheduling, risk management, and BIM Coordination tasks for Capital Projects. 
Enter and maintain healthcare capital project data using PM Web Software System including but not limited to: 
Funding Elements 
Budgets 
Budget Changes 
Purchase Orders and Contracts 
Pay Applications and other non-contract invoices 
Potential Change Orders 
Change Orders 
Forecasts and Cash Flows 
RFI’s and Submittals 
Field Work Directives 
Daily Observation Field Reports 
Non-Conformance Reports 
Scanning and uploading source documents to PM Web 
Process purchase order and contract award requisitions 
Process change requests 
Prepare cost reports for Project Controls Manager Review 
Update Schedules for capital projects STV 4 days ago original job Report job Apply Now Apply On Company Site Save this job Save this job Controls Engineer jobs in Boston, MA Jobs at STV in Boston, MA Controls Engineer salaries in Boston, MA Company Info Follow Get job updates from STV STV 151 reviews STV is an award-winning professional firm consistently ranking among the country's top companies in education, corrections, highways, bri... Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



---------Job_id 391, Position 14---------

 
 
 
 Director, Developer Audience - Bellevue, WA - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in Employers / Post Job Skip to main content Indeed Home Sign in Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Employers Create your resume Change country 🇺🇸 United States Help Center Start of main content 
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search Director, Developer Audience Microsoft 7,121 reviews Bellevue, WA Microsoft 7,121 reviews Read what people are saying about working here. Job details Job Type Full-time Full Job Description Microsoft is on a mission to empower every person and every organization on the planet to achieve more. Our culture is centered on embracing a growth mindset, a theme of inspiring excellence, and encouraging teams and leaders to bring their best each day. In doing so, we create life-changing innovations that impact billions of lives around the world. You can help us to achieve our mission. 
 
We are looking for an experienced leader to be the  Director, Product Marketing Manager  to drive Azure adoption with the local professional developer community in the US. Azure is the growth engine for Microsoft, spanning our app, infrastructure, data, and artificial intelligence businesses. This role will be accountable for driving awareness and engagement with the professional developer community, both as the local developer audience expert and as an Azure subject-matter expert. The right candidate will be an experienced people manager and technical marketing leader with experience marketing to developers across both open-source and Microsoft development stacks, with strong developer community and evangelism roots.
 
 
 Director, Azure Developer Product Marketing Manager  uses their deep developer audience expertise and excellent marketing skills to bring Microsoft’s marketing and technical teams together to help professional cloud developers discover and successfully use Microsoft’s Azure platform, both through in-person 1:many engagements and at digital scale. Azure Developer PMMs help drive broad awareness, skilling and adoption of Azure services to promote a self-sustaining ecosystem of skilled cloud developers. 
US Marketing & Operations (USM&O) is the ‘Marketing and COO’ function for Microsoft United States (MSUS), also known as the US subsidiary. USM&O executes company strategy and priorities that enable us to achieve our business goals with a focus on B2B customer engagement by developing and executing on go-to-market programs (GTMs), Marketing Campaigns, and a Field Operating Model. Driving a common operating model across the US subsidiary ensures consistent, measurable execution and landing of priorities. Driving alignment with our internal corporate partners in organizations including Product Marketing, Marketing & Consumer Business (MCB), Worldwide Commercial Business (WCB), Engineering, and Field Leadership is also critical to our collective success, as is continuing to listen, learn and respond via rapid feedback loops. 
 Responsibilities 
Developer Engagement: 
Lead & motivate the team of Developer Audience marketing managers; set strategy for engaging developers and drive integration across Azure BG. 
Be the visible thought leader, externally and internally, to the professional cloud developer audience.
 Actively engage Developers and tell the Azure story at local events and communities and support sales team to engage with developers in the managed accounts. Maintain technical understanding of the Azure platform (200 level) and be able to translate Azure value propositions into a locally relevant narrative that carries an authentic developer voice. 
Build and own the local Azure developer engagement plan, partnering with fellow leaders (local and corporate) to create a coherent business plan that prioritizes and customizes a local dev engagement mix of social, digital, and one-to-many experiential activities, in alignment with the Corporate strategy and plan.
 Build, foster and maintain healthy relationships with local developer marketing and technical resources, and understand how to optimize resource utilization to execute the local developer marketing plan to grow the Azure dev pipeline. These resources include the local Communication Marketing team, Cloud Advocate(s), Cloud Advocate PM’s, CSEs, Azure Global Black Belts, Cloud Solution Architects, and Application Solution Architects, and local developer community leaders (Microsoft MVPs, in partnership with the CPM). 
 
 Go-to-Market Planning  & Business Orchestration : 
Plan and execute the local Developer Audience engagement strategy for Microsoft Azure to professional developers through local Microsoft marketing engines and Global Engagement Programs, in alignment with the Corporate marketing strategy and plan. 
Set local community strategy (online, offline) and influence local cloud developer community leaders (Influencers, MSP, MVP, RD, non-MS) to earn Azure advocacy. Use influence within your network to evangelize Azure. 
Conduct reviews across the business to drive aligned execution and provide timely feedback that will shape the corporate engagement strategy. 
Identify and orchestrate strategic market-making plays. Own local business management strategy, partnering with fellow leaders to interpret opportunity and risk. 
Determine key insights and drive recommendations to accelerate adoption of Microsoft Azure back into the local leadership team. 
Capture, analyze and report key performance indicators, insights and metrics and drive informed feedback into Corporate teams to improve global and local execution plans and outcomes. 
 
Qualifications 
An Experienced Field Sales & Marketing Professional, candidates must have a minimum of 5 years of practical Subsidiary experience in marketing and sales roles. 
 Key Experiences, Skills, and Knowledge: 
Leadership:  Exceptional leadership skills and team building, decision-making, conflict resolution, negotiation skills, and follow through 
Bias for Action and Drive for Results:  Tenaciously pursues positive outcomes by using effective approached to solve problems. Takes responsibilities and holds others accountable for actions, decision, and goals. 
Adaptability:  Self-starter, comfortable with ambiguity. Decisive, analytical, logical, pragmatic, disciplined implementer of field strategy. 
Influencing for Impact:  Is extremely well connected in Microsoft both at the Area Leadership level and in the front line. Communicates and networks effectively. Successfully persuades and influences others. 
Masters Complexity:  Consistently demonstrates the ability to make the complex seem simple. Capable of breaking down complex issues into concepts that translate across multiple stakeholder groups (e.g., customers, partners, leadership, functions, geos etc.) 
Marketing:  Minimum of 3 years of experience marketing to developers, with a proven track record of building technical relationships within the local professional developer community (those paid to code). Deep marketing competencies/skills & experience, including analytical skills 
Cloud knowledge : Demonstrated technical marketing experience across cloud technologies, including Azure, AWS, and/or Google Cloud Platform 
Developer knowledge:  Deep insight about the local technical ecosystem, including cloud platform providers, developer communities and business trends. Strong understanding of software development principles, common DevOps practices, cloud platforms, business drivers, and emerging trends in Microsoft and non-Microsoft technologies and tools 
Microsoft is an equal opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to age, ancestry, color, family or medical care leave, gender identity or expression, genetic information, marital status, medical condition, national origin, physical or mental disability, political affiliation, protected veteran status, race, religion, sex (including pregnancy), sexual orientation, or any other characteristic protected by applicable laws, regulations and ordinances. 
Benefits/perks listed below may vary depending on the nature of your employment with Microsoft and the country where you work. Microsoft 29 days ago original job Report job Apply Now Apply On Company Site Save this job Save this job Developer jobs in Bellevue, WA Jobs at Microsoft in Bellevue, WA Developer salaries in Bellevue, WA Company Info Follow Get job updates from Microsoft Microsoft 7,121 reviews We believe in what people make possible



Microsoft enables digital transformation for the era of an intelligent cloud and an intelligen... Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



---------Job_id 323, Position 15---------

 
 
 
 Senior Product Designers (Freelance/Contractor) - Remote - San Mateo, CA 94401 - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in Employers / Post Job Skip to main content Indeed Home Sign in Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Employers Create your resume Change country 🇺🇸 United States Help Center Start of main content 
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search Senior Product Designers (Freelance/Contractor) - Remote Momentum Design Lab San Mateo, CA 94401 Remote Job details Job Type Contract Full Job Description About us: 
 
At Momentum Design Lab (MDL) we help global brands, fast paced technology startups, emerging software companies, and big tech to solve high impact business challenges through digital experience design. Our engagements span user/customer research, product strategy, design, and software development. We are user/customer experience obsessed, blending both digital product and service design to create experiences that are innovative and transformative to their organizations and their customers. Our approaches are versatile so each project may be unique in workflow and deliverables; from innovation sprints to extensive design thinking exercises, we adapt to meet the ever changing needs of the customer. 
What you could be working on as a Freelance/Contract Senior Digital Product Designer at MDL: 
 
No year is the same. Over the past 18 months you may have been designing for one or more interesting challenges such as: 
 
The 10 year vision of a connected cabin experience for a major automotive company 
 
Solving for the complexities of brain surgery through 3D, VR, and AR 
 
The end to end customer experience for one of world’s largest telecoms 
 
Modeling hundreds of billions of dollars for the largest venture fund’s portfolio 
 
Tackling misinformation about pandemics for the largest global health organization 
 
Fighting human trafficking and drug smuggling at the US border 
 
Finding obscure cures to major diseases with NLP 
 
Cyber security for the largest US government agencies 
 
The experience of the next generation of connected smart refrigerators 
 
Solving for climate change with carbon offsets credits 
 
An investment strategies platform for a major financial services company 
 
Who we’re looking for: 
 
You have 4+ years of applicable design experience 
 
You are an actual digital product designer e.g. you move pixels around with precision and have a portfolio that demonstrates it (no offense to you user researchers, we value you too - just not for this role) 
 
You enjoy learning about new industries and are a quick study 
 
You are looking for opportunities to help brands define their brand's character 
 
You are a solid visual and interaction designer with the appetite to learn or improve your skills for translating user research insights into actionable strategy 
 
You enjoy creating modular, scalable wireframes and mockups that creatively apply consistent interface patterns across a variety of use cases and device types 
 
You can design using Figma, Sketch, Adobe XD, Principle and can adapt to new tools as they become available 
 
You can collaborate using Mural, Invision, Zeplin.io 
 
You know transactional data and what to do with it, thus you eat data visualization for lunch 
 
You like reducing the friction between the end user and their goals by pushing the limits of artificial intelligence 
 
You have a keen sense of motion design, 3D, and frontend technologies; or you want to learn 
 
You love to combine empathy with design to create usable experiences 
 
You are up for the challenge to chart new markets and invent new industries 
 
You come with experience, but want to learn new methodologies; can share and collaborate with others on UX/UI guidelines and design patterns 
 
Your critical thinking skills are a strong attribute which helps you work through abstract and complex processes 
 
You understand that working at an agency gives you a wide perspective of many industries, processes, budget constraints, timelines, and unique customer needs 
 
You have an appetite to learn from your peers and share your knowledge 
 
You have the ability to clearly express yourself and defend what you create, how it drives your process, and most importantly why is it effective. 
 
You enjoy working with others, collaborating with your team and customers, and understand that there is no I in Momentum 
 
This is a remote position, however, you must be available working hours EST or PST which are aligned with our New York and Silicon Valley offices. If you would like to work full time from our offices, please apply for our full time positions. 
Additional Skills 
 
Creating and conducting User/Customer/Stakeholder interviews, Solution Validation Interviews, and Usability Testing 
 
Conducting current state assessments inclusive of heuristic evaluations and your expert analysis. 
 
Review and parse user research findings 
 
Understand, conceptualize, create and communicate user mental models, personas, user flow diagrams, journey maps, and other information architecture deliverables. 
This is a remote position. Momentum Design Lab 7 days ago original job If you require alternative methods of application or screening, you must approach the employer directly to request this as Indeed is not responsible for the employer's application process. Report job Apply Now Apply Now Save this job Save this job Senior Product Designer jobs in San Mateo, CA Jobs at Momentum Design Lab in San Mateo, CA Senior Product Designer salaries in San Mateo, CA Company Info Follow Get job updates from Momentum Design Lab Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



---------Job_id 677, Position 16---------

 
 
 
 Facilities Manager - Redwood City, CA 94063 - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in Employers / Post Job Skip to main content Indeed Home Sign in Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Employers Create your resume Change country 🇺🇸 United States Help Center Start of main content 
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search Facilities Manager HeartFlow, Inc. Redwood City, CA 94063 Job details Job Type Full-time Full Job Description We have an exciting opportunity for a highly experienced, exceptional leader and self-starter! The Facilities Manager will lead a small, multi-site team and oversee the maintenance, security, office management, future expansion, planning and build-out of HeartFlow facilities worldwide. This includes but is not limited to managing relationships with various building management firms, adhering facility management to applicable regulations and guidelines, managing video surveillance, badge access and maintaining clean and operational facilities. This role will also take on special projects as needed. 
 Facility Planning/Analysis: 
As part of a working group, determine investment and actions necessary to expand usage of existing facilities and acquiring new facilities, including outside the current locations as well as possibly internationally. 
Post-COVID office reconfiguration to provide optimal protective workspaces for returning employees. 
Prepare detailed budget geared towards facility expansion and continuously analyze facility costs and renegotiate and optimize spending where possible. 
Provide mentorship and expertise to a small team of facilities professionals 
 
 
Physical Security: 
Administer and manage the camera surveillance systems and ensure appropriate coverage of video surveillance. 
Administer and manage the badge access systems and ensure appropriate audit of distributed badges and inventory of unused badges. 
 Facility Operations: 
Coordinate with our sub tenants regarding facilities related matters such as coordinating booking and arranging conference rooms, etc. 
Prepare disaster response plans and participate in bi-annual disaster recovery response exercises. 
Maintain facility to recognized industry frameworks and standards. 
Work directly with building managers / property owners to mitigate and / or resolve facility related issues requiring approval or collaboration with building owners. 
Manage day-to-day operations, including infrastructure maintenance, occupant support, and development projects. 
Maintain office services by organizing office operations and procedures. 
Manage the design, planning, and implementation of workspace planning. 
Manage and provide oversight for all office events as planned by the Great Workplace Team 
 Additional Duties: 
Provide back-up assistance and guidance to office management team members as needed. 
Establish and maintain effective professional business relationships with all levels of management, employees, and business contacts. 
Other duties as required. 
 Skills Needed: 
Experience mentoring, coaching and managing others 
High degree of integrity and work ethic. 
Able to maintain professional manner and diplomacy in fast-paced and stressful situations. 
Able to handle sensitive information with professionalism and discretion. 
Excellent customer service, written and verbal communication, planning, and organizational skills. 
Quick learner and takes initiative to solve problems. 
High attention to detail. 
Exceptional multi-tasking and time-management skills. 
Able to anticipate the needs of the executive and team members. 
Advanced MS Office (Word, Excel, PowerPoint). 
 Educational Requirements & Work Experience:
 BA/BS Degree preferred but not required. 
5+ years of office management. 
Management experience required. 
Experience in start-up tech companies preferred. 
 Physical Demands of the Job:
 Front desk duties, medium lifting. 
 About HeartFlow, Inc. 
HeartFlow, Inc. is a medical technology company redefining the way heart disease is diagnosed and treated. Our non-invasive HeartFlow FFRct Analysis leverages deep learning to create a personalized 3D model of the heart. By using this model, clinicians can better evaluate the impact a blockage has on blood flow and determine the best treatment for patients. Our technology is reflective of our Silicon Valley roots and incorporates decades of scientific evidence with the latest advances in artificial intelligence. The HeartFlow FFRct Analysis is commercially available in the United States, Canada, Europe and Japan. For more information, visit www.heartflow.com. 
HeartFlow, Inc. is an Equal Opportunity Employer. We are committed to a work environment that supports, inspires, and respects all individuals and do not discriminate against any employee or applicant because of race, color, religion, marital status, age, national origin, ancestry, physical or mental disability, medical condition, pregnancy, genetic information, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, veteran status, or any other status protected under federal, state, or local law. This policy applies to every aspect of employment at HeartFlow, including recruitment, hiring, training, relocation, promotion, and termination. 
Positions posted for HeartFlow are not intended for or open to third party recruiters / agencies. Submission of any unsolicited resumes for these positions will be considered to be free referrals. HeartFlow, Inc. 30+ days ago original job Report job Apply Now Apply On Company Site Save this job Save this job Facilities Manager jobs in Redwood City, CA Jobs at HeartFlow in Redwood City, CA Facilities Manager salaries in Redwood City, CA Company Info Follow Get job updates from HeartFlow, Inc. Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



---------Job_id 116, Position 17---------

 
 
 
 Frontend Software Engineer - Boston, MA - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in Employers / Post Job Skip to main content Indeed Home Sign in Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Employers Create your resume Change country 🇺🇸 United States Help Center Start of main content 
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search Frontend Software Engineer ANDURIL INDUSTRIES Boston, MA Anduril is a defense technology company, bringing Silicon Valley talent and funding to the defense sector. Our technology helps our customers solve their toughest challenges by enabling them to make better, more informed decisions in life-and-death situations. We’ve assembled a diverse team of experts in artificial intelligence, computer vision, sensor fusion, optics, and data analysis that are creating software and hardware solutions to radically evolve the capabilities of the United States and our allies. If you are passionate about solving problems that have real impact, come join Anduril and build the future of defense. 
We are looking for Frontend Software Engineers to join our team. As a Frontend Software Engineer at Anduril you will be architecting and building out our front end features and tooling, deploying them to users, and making sure they're meeting users' requirements. You will be working alongside a team of engineers with diverse backgrounds. 
 
 As an early member of the team, your decisions today will have a large impact on the company today and into the future. We believe that simple systems are easier to understand, maintain, and scale. You will be making trade-offs as you work to ensure that our systems are prepared to scale — being able to effectively communicate these trade-offs with your teammates is a must. 
The ideal candidate has curiosity and experience in backend systems as well so that you can understand and contribute to it in support of your frontend responsibilities. 
 What you'll do 
Design, build, and deploy a real-time, map-based interface for displaying and interacting with sensor data and commanding physical assets 
Fetch and manage large streams of data while maintaining performant rendering in a low-friction user experience 
Build and design immersive image-viewing experiences on multiple platforms, including web-based and mobile 3D image viewing as well as integrated VR experiences 
 Required qualifications 
Degree in Computer Science, Operations Research, Electrical Engineering or related technical degree 
Experience working on frontend applications, especially data-intensive or map-based systems 
Proficiency with a programming language such as Javascript, Typescript, or Java 
Ability to empathize with end-users, to turn needs into features, and to balance user experience with engineering constraints 
U.S. Person status may be required as this position needs to access export controlled data. 
 Preferred qualifications 
We encourage people from all backgrounds go apply but our tech stack uses AWS, C++, Go, Typescript, and React so familiarity with all of these tools and languages would be useful 
Previous experience working with the DoD 
Startup experience 
3D mapping experience
 Anduril is an equal-opportunity employer, and we encourage candidates from all backgrounds to apply. If you are someone passionate to work on problems that matter, we’d love to hear from you! ANDURIL INDUSTRIES 30+ days ago original job Report job Apply Now Apply On Company Site Save this job Save this job Front End Developer jobs in Boston, MA Jobs at ANDURIL INDUSTRIES in Boston, MA Front End Developer salaries in Boston, MA Company Info Follow Get job updates from ANDURIL INDUSTRIES Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



---------Job_id 2193, Position 18---------

 
 
 
 Frontend Software Engineer - Palo Alto, CA - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in Employers / Post Job Skip to main content Indeed Home Sign in Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Employers Create your resume Change country 🇺🇸 United States Help Center Start of main content 
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search Frontend Software Engineer Tesla 4,695 reviews Palo Alto, CA Tesla 4,695 reviews Read what people are saying about working here. Job details Job Type Full-time Full Job Description ROLE 
Frontend web services play an integral role in Tesla’s highest profile initiatives. These services can cover everything from training Autopilot’s artificial intelligence, empowering our global Gigafactory network, building UIs for our renewable energy products, and much more. The importance of frontend systems is limitless, and your work will be applied to solving tangible, real-world problems. This is a unique opportunity to accelerate the push for renewable energy, autonomous driving, and internet of things infrastructure. 
RESPONSIBILITIES 
Engineer frontend Javascript platforms using React, Typescript, Redux, D3 Scales, WebGL, and more 
Build scalable, performant, maintainable, and well-tested features 
Architect, maintain, and improve Tesla's frontend codebase 
Obsess over delivering beautiful, intuitive, and power applications for both internal and external users 
Work cross functionally with everything from AI researchers, backend engineers, data scientists, and mechanical engineers 
REQUIREMENTS 
BS/MS in Computer Science or related field, or equivalent industry experience 
Strong understanding of JavaScript (ES6+), CSS, and HTML. 
Modern JavaScript tools (node.js, TypeScript, React, React Native) 
Strong UI and graphic design sensibilities Tesla 30+ days ago original job Report job Apply Now Apply On Company Site Save this job Save this job Front End Developer jobs in Palo Alto, CA Jobs at Tesla in Palo Alto, CA Front End Developer salaries in Palo Alto, CA Company Info Follow Get job updates from Tesla Tesla 4,695 reviews Tesla is accelerating the world’s transition to sustainable energy. We design, manufacture, sell, install and service the world’s best so... Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



---------Job_id 1356, Position 19---------

 
 
 
 Project Manager - San Jose, CA - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in Employers / Post Job Skip to main content Indeed Home Sign in Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Employers Create your resume Change country 🇺🇸 United States Help Center Start of main content 
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search This job has expired on Indeed Reasons could include: the employer is not accepting applications, is not actively hiring, or is reviewing applications Project Manager Lionbridge Technologies San Jose, CA Job details Job Type Full-time Full Job Description Lionbridge enables more than 800 world-leading brands to increase international market share, speed adoption of products and effectively engage their customers in local markets worldwide. Using our innovative cloud technology platforms and our global crowd of more than 100,000 professional cloud workers, we provide translation, digital marketing, global content management and application testing solutions that ensure global brand consistency, local relevancy and technical usability across all touch points of the customer lifecycle. Based in Waltham, Mass., Lionbridge maintains solution centers in 28 countries. 
 
Employee Sub-Group: Regular FT Salaried
 
Work Schedule:
 
Location: San Jose , California
 
Position Title: Project Manager 
 
Req: 32206
 
 
As a Project Manager, you will be responsible for the day-to-day management of one or more complex programs. You may also manage Project Coordinator(s) assisting with projects. The role requires class-leading customer engagement involving strong written and verbal communication skills, ability to empathize with and respond to customers' needs, problem-solving skills and the ability to function effectively in a fast-moving, rapidly changing environment. Collaboration with multi-location and cross-functional teams will be key to maintain and improve customer satisfaction, revenue and profitability.
 
 
 Primary Responsibilities
 
 Recognize customer needs and proactively focus on fulfilling these needs through innovative thinking and collaboration with internal technical, production, quality and management teams.
 Own and maintain project financials, including revenue recognition, revenue forecasting and customer billing.
 Collaborate with internal teams to initiate and implement procedural changes and customized workflows.
 Review customer satisfaction regularly.
 While working with our local and off-shore teams, plan and monitor projects to meet deadlines, quality and budget requirements. Focus on continuous improvements and cost saving measures.
 Optimization through automation - provide innovative solutions to improve processes. 
 
 
 Minimum Requirements
 
 3 - 5 years of experience a Project Manager, ideally in Machine Learning or similar environment/domain.
 Experience in crowd or data collection projects involving text, speech, image or video, is an advantage.
 General knowledge of artificial intelligence and machine learning is an advantage
 Experience in managing global projects with an extended complexity.
 Technical proficiency (including spreadsheets, Office tools, Google Suite).
 Fluency in English is a must.
 Experience in financial management and budgeting.
 Experience in managing small teams.
 Problem solving skills.
 Innovative approach.
 Ability to optimize tasks and processes.
 Proactivity. 
 
 
All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability or protected veteran status. Lionbridge Technologies 1 day ago original job Report job Project Manager jobs in San Jose, CA Jobs at Lionbridge Technologies in San Jose, CA Project Manager salaries in San Jose, CA Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



---------Job_id 534, Position 20---------

 
 
 
 College Intern - IT (4 weeks) Virtual - City of Lakeland, FL - Indeed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content Indeed Home Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Upload your resume Sign in Employers / Post Job Skip to main content Indeed Home Sign in Find jobs Company reviews Find salaries Employers Create your resume Change country 🇺🇸 United States Help Center Start of main content 
 
 What Where Find Jobs Advanced Job Search College Intern - IT (4 weeks) Virtual City of Lakeland, FL 60 reviews City of Lakeland, FL Remote City of Lakeland, FL 60 reviews Read what people are saying about working here. Job details Salary $12 - $16 an hour Job Type Part-time Internship Full Job Description Performs entry level professional duties of moderate difficulty providing the opportunity for professional training in various offices throughout the City. Performs assigned duties to acquire knowledge of methods, procedures and standards required for successful performance. Specific activities vary by department. Work is performed under direct supervision. 
 
This is a virtual internship. Intern will complete a research project on emerging technology in public safety. Prior students have focused on topics such as artificial intelligence, drones, body cameras, wearable technology, and 5G cellular connectivity. Interns will be required to virtually present their findings in a PowerPoint presentation at the end of the internship. City laptop will be provided. The position is for 20 hrs per week for 4 weeks and will run in three rotations: 
Rotation #1: May 24th - June 18th 
Rotation #2: June 21st - July 16th 
Rotation #3: July 19th - August 13th 
 ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS AND ADDITIONAL FUNCTIONS:
 Complete a research project on emerging technology in public safety. Provides professional support such as tracking and charting citywide performance measures; develops tracking methods and gathering performance data. 
Performs self-reading as assigned, correcting errors as they are found. 
Conducts special studies in conjunction with a project, analyzes data, and makes recommendations based upon studies. 
ADDITIONAL FUNCTIONS : 
 
Performs related work as required. 
 QUALIFICATIONS (EDUCATION, TRAINING AND EXPERIENCE) AND SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
 Enrollment as a Junior or Senior or recent graduation from a degree-seeking program in an accredited college or university in Computer Science or a similar field. 
 KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS, ABILITIES AND WORKING ENVIRONMENT/PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS:
 Understanding of IT concepts 
Ability to establish and maintain cooperative and effective relationships with supervisor, co-workers, other City employees and the general public. 
Knowledge of or ability to learn Microsoft Office Suites. 
Skill in communicating effectively both verbally and in writing and to request clarification when needed. 
WORKING ENVIRONMENT/PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS: 
Requires sedentary work that involves walking or standing some of the time, exerting up to ten (10) pounds of force on a recurring basis and routine keyboard operations. 
The job risks exposure to no significant environmental hazards. 
The job requires normal visual acuity, field of vision, hearing and speaking. 
All City of Lakeland positions are subject to testing (e.g. written, oral, performance, computerized, interview, and/or any combination). Candidates selected for testing will be notified via email or telephone. Please check your e-mail and telephone messages regularly, including "junk" folders. Test times and locations to be announced. 
THE CITY OF LAKELAND IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY/EQUAL ACCESS EMPLOYER AND A DRUG FREE WORKPLACE City of Lakeland, FL 1 day ago original job Report job Apply Now Apply On Company Site Save this job Save this job Student Intern jobs in City of Lakeland, FL Jobs at City of Lakeland in City of Lakeland, FL Student Intern salaries in City of Lakeland, FL Company Info Follow Get job updates from City of Lakeland, FL 60 reviews Let employers find you Thousands of employers search for candidates on Indeed Upload your resume Hiring Lab Career Advice Browse Jobs Browse Companies Salaries Find Certifications Indeed Events Work at Indeed Countries About Help Center © 2021 Indeed Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accessibility at Indeed Privacy Center Cookies Privacy Terms Let Employers Find You Upload Your Resume 
 
 
 
 
 



